Q: Everyone, welcome to the second episode of Beyond the Blueprint Today we're here with Mr. Wolf and he'll be talking a little about chemical engineering So the first question we have is what inspired you to pursue a career in chemical engineering and how did you find your niche and process safety.

A: All right. Thank you for that question, Joshua. I have to admit, I, you know, full disclosure. Chemi in high school wasn't my, my favorite subject. So it's a little bit unusual that I went into. Chemical engineering, but I was good at the time at math and science and I was a problem solver and in engineering that's what we do we solve problems. When I was a freshman in college, I kind of went through a bit of a process of elimination where I was considering different majors like mechanical engineering. Civil engineering, electrical engineering, and after about a year, what I discovered was that chemical engineering is interesting because it involves how molecules and the architecture of molecules influences the behavior of different materials that you know we have every day like materials that are breathable or waterproof or bulletproof. So that really kind of fascinated me and I started to do research under a professor in my sophomore year and learned a lot about just material science and that's what I think really kind of cemented my decision to go into chemical engineering. And then years later process safety is a specific domain within chemical engineering, it's very different than personal safety, like slips trips and falls, personal safety often involves just a single individual, which's different about the process safety domain is that it does require an understanding of thermodynamics, kinetics. The transport flow properties of materials so that those hazards can be managed appropriately to prevent catastrophic releases or accidents that could impact multiple people, the environment or businesses, so if you think about Chernobyl or the Bal India disaster that happened in 1984 those are those are real, The types of risks that a chemical engineer that's in process safety would protect companies against.

Q: Thank you. the second that is your education, sorry what? 嗯。 Sorry, what? That you can give ask the second question,. Yeah, okay, how did your education prepare you for your current role at Honeywell were there specific courses or experiences that shape your focus on safety management?

A: Yeah, another really good question. Yeah, I completed my bachelor's degree in chemical engineering as I was working, I also had aspirations to do more research and development so I went and pursued a master's degree and having worked with, Commercial groups for a business and developing new products that went out to clients at the time I was working for a company that made protective foam and packaging. And so Hwlla Packer just as an example, was one of the customers, and as I work more with the business and commercial people, I decided that it was a good idea for me to pursue an MBA, a master's in business administration. And because as an engineer, you know math and science skills are pretty strong, what I got really interested in that I think benefited benefits me now, especially with my role with Honeywell is really understanding how organization work, so organizational leadership, organizational psychology, really understanding how to manage a business to create a product and do that, In a way that's sustainable and you're maintaining or creating processes that are environmentally friendly. So a lot of safety or process safety is about developing a shared vision and values amongst a group of people in an organization to lead them to be able to solve complex problems and again, I'll kind of keep going back to that as engineers we were're problem solvers so. I think those were the courses and experiences that really set me up for success in my current role as the director of Pro Safety for Honeywell.

Q: So for our next question, I guess specifically about something you did at your job, so can you walk me through a time when you had to identify and mitigate a major chemical process hazard?

A: Yeah, this is a great question. Engineers and process safety engineers often talk about what we call the day process safety hit home. And for some people that may have involved an accident or an incident or a significant release that either impacted them or maybe it hurt a coworker, and that changed their life going forward. For me. The the day that process safety for me hit home where. I was identifying and mitigating a major chemical hazard. Involved a material that was potentially explosive. And around that time, the company that I had worked for, my mentor for a number of years, had just retired, and so when he retired, I was the lead technical authority or expert that was in charge so everybody was coming to me for advice on how are we going to manage this particular change for a very hazardous and potentially explosive material. So that moment that very real moment the gravity kind of hit me where you realize that other people's lives are in your hands with with a decision that you make and so there are specific processes that we have to follow anytime we make a change to a chemical facility to ensure that we do it in a safe way right so it's got to be reviewed by a team of experts you have to do a risk assessment and really just, ify the rationale for for making that change and this particular material. 40 or 50 years prior to that the company had a significant explosion that fatally injured an employee at one of their facilities and that was the first and only time that they had a fatality so from that point forward you know they developed safety management systems and had a perfect record. And the images of that accident really had a profound effect on me realizing the energies involved with different chemicals and so in a way it kind of instilled, I call it a bit of a fear, but it's really a respect for the chemicals that we're dealing with and managing.

Q: Thank you for that. Yeah, thank you. So how do you apply chemical engineering principles like. Thermodynamics or reaction kinetics incur work related to safety and sustainability.

A: Yeah, so I think thermodynamics and kinetics have. Always kind of been a foundational kind of basic fundamental science that you need to take into consideration anytime that you're either. Developing a product or a process or managing safety safety risk earlier on in my career before I got into safety where I would develop new products I had mentioned I work for a company that developed foam packaging and if you ever looked inside of a bicycle helmet and you see the foam structure or if you you know bought a big screen television and you know you open up the box and you take the foam, In the television that foam is engineered in a very specific way to be able to withstand an impact right if somebody drops the TV on the way know that it's being shipped to your house or if somebody's wearing a bicycle helmet and they have an accident and unfortunately hit their head off the street, it's engineered in a way to absorb that energy and protect whatever it is inside of the foam, whether it's a TV. Or someone's someone's skull, right? Early on in my career, I was involved in the development of new foam applications where the goal was to create something and modify the molecular architecture to be able to provide the same level of protection, but with less foam. And being able to do it with less foam made it more environmentally friendly right so fewer shipments or less waste of packaging after it would arrive at the customers, you know the customers's destination most foam packaging is discarded or you know thrown into the trash there are some applications where maybe it's recycled. But our goal was to come up with something that had a lower environmental footprint.

Q: 不事。 So for our next question, I'm going to be asking, what are some common misconceptions people have about chemical engineering careers?

A: 😀呵呵。 😊 Yeah, this is a good one I think. Undergrad when you're in college chemical engineering at least when I was in college was probably the most feared engineering degree of all of them just because of the high level of difficulty so you know one misconception is that we didn't really have much of a life we just we're studying all the time or in the library now I spent a lot of time in the library but I was able to balance that with with a life outside of school. お？ Maybe another misconception is that chemical engineers work in laboratories and work with chemicals that's also not necessarily true there are many different career paths that chemical engineers can go on to and then and then another one is. We walk around with periodic tables in our back pocket, that's not true, but I. One of my professors in my sophomore year. He made the comment in one of our classes that there's a lot of chemical engineers on Wall Street. Doing financial modeling and at the time I didn't quite understand that, but after I completed my degree I knew why he he had that observation and which was true is because as chemical engineers you learn a problem solving skill set to be able to do very sophisticated modeling and that the math, Of being able to do that modeling easily translates from chemicals to financial modeling to operations modeling. There's a lot of real world applications for that skill set, so. I think the misconception is that if you get a chemical engineering degree, you're always going to work with chemicals, but that that's actually, that's probably, you know, maybe maybe about half true.

Q: I Think for the first one you're talking about with the hard degree, I've seen videos and everyone's always saying that like someone will come and interview someone they'll ask like what's the hardest engineering major and they'll always say chemical engineering or electrical. Yeah, it's difficult, but what I find is you know when you're passionate about something and you're interested and you're curious about it. And you know that's what you want to pursue it makes it easier were there were very few engineers that would transfer out of say mechanical or civil or electrical and go into chemical, but there were many chemical engineers that would transfer out and go to mechanical, civil, electrical or industrial engineering., since you're an expert at safety and risk management. What software tools or simulation platforms do commonly used in your safety and risk analysis work?

A: Yeah, one of the tools or softwares, I guess you could call it that has has been really an important. 嗯。 Kind of principal foundational type method, I would say that I've used quite a bit in my career is Monte Carlo simulation. So you've probably taken, maybe you've taken a probability course or a statistics course in high school. And the Neman Carlo method, it actually, it was invented back in the 1940s while researchers were working at Los Alamos National Laboratories on the atomic bomb. And the reason why they call it the Monte Carlo method is because one of the researchers, I guess his uncle spent a lot of time at the casino in Monaco Monte Carlo and so the method itself is a lot about and probability distribution and statistics. So they named it after his uncle's gambling habit. But it has really broad applicability. I was first introduced to it in graduate school when I was pursuing my master's degree in chemical engineering. And it was a way to mathematically represent the behavior of molecules, so instead of just using first principle type formulas to calculate say, yeah, what would the pressure or temperature be of a given molecule at a certain you know at certain conditions? You were able to simulate that and the reason why simulation is important when you get a lot of complexity within the interactions or the variables that are involved trying to represent the reality with the model it's a very useful technique and so I was able to translate that from chemical engineering and modeling molecules to modeling risk in chemical facilities to understand okay. likelihood or the severity of a particular incident if it were to happen and what are the prevention or mitigation measures that we need to put in place to reduce the risk as low as possible it turns out that Monte Carlo simulation is also used for financial modeling so that's that's the you know the other the other skill set there that is very useful on wall Street.

Q: See so it's very widespread so since it is the model and with the advancement of AI today, has it made any impact on the improvement of the model?

A: Yeah, certainly AI and the ability to train a model if you have data to be able to be more predictive in its ability to anticipate whether certain events will happen, so I agree that the advent of artificial intelligence, I think has taken that. That type of analysis and method to greater lengths and. Utility in order to be able to, you know predict situations, whether it's in a chemical facility or if it involves safety or if it involves financial risk.

Q: See, okay, next. So you could see like. Like predicts better based on instant situations that happen.

A: That's a very complex subject. Whenever you begin to try to understand when a certain event will happen. It's hard to predict when it'll happen, however, you can develop models that will tell you how vulnerable you are to a certain risk happening within a given timeframe, so I don't think we've cracked the code to you know being able to anticipate that it's going to happen on this day at this time, but I think the models have improved in such a way where the resolution in that time frame. 😡 Of when it could happen is much better.

Q: Okay, thank you. Next question I'm going to ask, can you explain how process safety integrates with the broader goals of sustainability and energy efficiency in chemical plants?

A: Yeah, they're I would say very aligned, you know, I work for a company Honeywell that develops and commercializes advanced materials. That enhance the eco efficiencyency while also reducing environmental impact, the primary focus of the business that I'm involved in is to develop next generation solutions such as low global warming potential refrigerants, other types of high strength fibers or ballistic resistant fibers, performance chemicals, chemicals that go into semiconductors. And specialty additives. 嗯。 In all of those, you know we are looking for ways to reduce our environmental footprint, the amount of emissions that are released to the environment, so if you look at the overall operational sustainability of a facility, those are things that as chemical engineers and as process safety professionals, when we work collectively as a business, we're all working towards that same mission. And goal to produce materials in a way that's not just cost efficient but efficient in terms of its impact on the environment.

Q: Okay, thank you. So. My question is. How has the role of chemical engineers changed with the rise of green energy and sustainability efforts.

A: So green energy and chemical engineers, I would say there's a lot of emerging science in that space with respect to new products and new developments for one example is just the hydrogen economy right and how do we use hydrogen in a way versus more you know traditional fossil fuels so thats that's one error. Wd is another solar is another, I mentioned the company that I work for Honeywell, we produce materials that go into semiconductors, so these types of specialty additives or specialty materials that require you know them to be able to operate in conditions that are very adverse, either very corrosive or high temperature or high pressure conditions. New new battery technology is also another emerging area so that we're using electricity more so in our daily lives, whether it's in you know transportation or just in a lot of our household goods so that they're more ecofriend, so I think these are all ways that chemical engineers in particular, our skill set and the ability to solve those types of complex problems. Can contribute to. The rise of green energy and a more sustainable future for our planet.

Q: So what is one project you're especially proud of that has made a meaningful impact on society or in environmental impact?

A: Yeah, so about 20 years ago I was working for the Dupont company and back in that time frame, you may have heard of PFAS, which are perfinated materials that are. Quite common to be used in things like. Teflon or water resistant applications. And so back in the early 2000s, there was an effort because these perforinated surfactants are were environmentally persistent. So they didn't biodegrade very well in another another. Way to characterize them is that they were bioacummulative. And so we had produced a product that used PFAS. and I was the. Engineer responsible for the manufacturing process, and. What wasn't known at the time is that there were other alternative surfactants, or they're basically soaps that could be used in the process that were non PFAS materials. and which would environmentally degrade so they weren't persistent they wouldn't accumulate in the environment and so as a chemical engineer I was the lead on the project on the manufacturing side to really take this new technology from research and development and implemented in our manufacturing process so that was a really significant change for the company very early on when this science was emerging. And so the end result is that we were able to replace all of the products there with this new surfactant that was you know essentially very similar to a dish detergent right and we use this dish detergent or soaps to wash clothes all the time so to be able to replace a PFAS surfactant with something that is much more of a household common soap was quite a breakthrough, and discovery, and when I look back on it, it was definitely a highlight in my career, not just because of the impact on the business, but the impact that it had on the environment and sustainability.

Q: Yeah that's very impressive thank you so our final question is what advice would you give to a high school student interested in chemical engineering, especially one that wants to make a global impact in safety or sustainability.

A: Yeah, thank you for that question. like we've talked today about we've had an opportunity I've really enjoyed this conversation about chemical engineering and and process safety and you know talked about some of the misconceptions talked about the opportunities there are in chemical engineering so my message and my advice would be to you know be open to the possibilities that a degree in chemical engineering can offer so many of my friends who, chemicalemical engineers, they go on to successful careers in healthcare, marketing, finance, risk management, there's really a very you know broad career trajectory that you could go on because it's a very versatile degree. So maybe just because chemistry may not be your favorite subject if you were like me in high school don't rule it out I guess i'm a good example of that and it took me a few years to realize what I was really passionate about and then when I when I when I learned that chemical engineering was a pathway for me to get there that's what you know for me cemented my decision to pursue it and now you know'm, Fortunate enough to lead. An organization. That's a Fortune 500 company with Honeywell and really enjoying it and having the time of my life. So I would say, yeah, ask questions, talk to chemical engineers, understand what they do, and see if that's something that is aligned and fits with what your career goals are.

Q: Mrwell, thank you for your time and thank you for all your insights.

A: And you so much. Okay, you're welcome, it was nice talking with you yeah.