Q: Mr. Xavier, can you share your journey and how did you become a makerspace technician?

A: Okay, well, first off, thank you for having me, excited to be here. I course see how you guys do that. How I started would basically be. Way back in middle school, I got my first introduction to robotics. And I kind of did like a small. Nice competition. After school program in my school. And I kind of carried over to high school and when I got to high school, I joined my high school's first robotics competition team. We had one competition that year we managed to win that one competition to make it all into the world championships. At that moment, I realized that I kind of wanted to do something. In engineering in that kind of space, whether it be kind of like robotics, computer science or engineering. At the time I didn't know exactly. What field it was going to be, I took a class in computer science and I thought that's what I wanted to do so I went to school for computer science over the years I've always stuck with robotics and mentoring high school teams such like that. With my high school team and then started the revised team here at Aududi back in 2016. And I've always kind of had a connection to Audie through the robotics team. Over the years, I gained experience with work. More professionals in the industry or the robotics competition, like engineers with NASA engineers from. like. And Apple and all a different ones working with them and learning. Through all of that networking. Collaboration, I was able to. Get the experience that I have now to become a makespace technician.

Q: So second question I guess you40 answered but we can get specifically, so were there any projects or mentors early in your career that really shaped your path?

A: Projects, I would say, was just doing robotics as a high school student kind of. Shaped my career path just because. I liked. Playing with Les growing up, I didn't know to what capacity and I kind of wish to be honest I kind of wish I would have done robotics. as a kid, because I think that would have helped me kind of determine what discipline I wanted to go into because I did computer science, which was the programming aspect and I thought that's what I wanted to do but reality, I do enjoy the programming aspect, I do enjoy programming, but I probably should have got a couple more years on the re to kind of fully learn. What I wanted to do. That's kind of what the project was was kind of what. The. Project that got me into it as far as mentors, I would say it was my robotics team mentors, the first two guys that mentored my high school team, those are the ones that kind of got me into the field and I kind of stuck and then I met a couple other mentors from other robotics teams that kind of also learned from the down. Realistically that's kind of what helped me kind of. Stay into this path and get to this point.

Q: So what's your favorite part about working and a hands on a very creative environment like how make a space?

A: I would say my favorite part is probably seeing what the students create and just kind of like seeing what they come up with because. I do have a little bit of creativity, I'm not the best but I do I can I like teaching the kids how to use the machines and then kind of seeing what they come up with and that's the cool part is just putting them giving the students the tools and the access to the different machines and then kind of just seeing where their creativity takes things and goes from there so I like watching and seeing what students come up with that's the cool part for me.

Q: Do you usually guide students in their creative path?

A: I try to because at the end of the day, I want the students to. ha like more of an ownership of what they worked on and kind of feel like this is something that they came up with and so what I like to do is I like to partner with the students and they tell me what they want their end goal to be or kind of what they want to learn from it and then we'll work together on the tools and how they can achieve their goal so like for example we had a student last year I wanted to create a surfboard but she didn't know exactly the right tools to do as she thought she could just come in there and just use a table saw and then just kind of stand up down which is true she could have used a table saw. But we have a CNC machine would have made that made the surfboard a lot more of an actual size so she didn't have to spend hours of standinging it down to get the curves and stuff like that and so we taught her how to use a CNC and then she was like well I want to do this with the like maybe paint it or like engrave it and so we were able to kind of show her the tools of what they were capable of doing to kind of let her see how far she could take that.

Q: So for specifically, I guess role based for makerspace and condition, what is the typical day for you to look like in the maker space?

A: So a typical day is basically I kind of come in and I kind of make sure, you know I look and see what's on my schedule as far as like what classes are coming in and what machines they need and then my job is to make sure that those machines, Ready to go like they work, they function, make sure we have the material to use them, for example, if we have a class that's going using the laser engraver, make sure the laser is cleaned and ready to go and then make sure that we have whatever materials that they need because I think we don't then I have to go order them depending on if the teachers get us a lot of like a lot of lead time which sometimes they do sometimes they don't they're pretty busy teachers are very busy around here so sometimes if they have lead time I can then go order the stuff so it be. he in time for it other times I might have to just run to like a local home depot or something like that I get materials so yeah that's kind of my job is to make sure the machines are functioning marketing, make sure you have the materials for the classes and then when the class comes in I'll help them out. Whatever materials that they need and such like that.

Q: Wait speaking of machines, wait I'm sure you have favorites, but like overall what kind of machines do you like most often maintain or use

A: so the machines I get the most used are three app printers just because they're a lot easier for students to use and kind of. It's one of those projects where one of the machines where you can start the project and then you can just leave it and then come back and get it in a couple hours, so the3 printers get the most use and then I would say the laser green rig is the second most use is because it's the second easiest machine to use. I personally like using the water jet and the CNC is because it's cool to take like a just make big light. Sheheet of aluminum or wood and just put it into a machine and then it gives you something completely different so those are my favorite machines to use and those are the machines that don't get used. As much, just because of the. Higher level of skill that's required to use those machines and such as like material using the software that is required to use them and stuff like that so but those are my favorite ones, a lot of students prefer they just love the ability to come in and just kind of sit down do whatever need to do Ch 3 to printer and just come back later for.

Q: Okay, so how would you appear like a student comes into something like a project, how would you like go through and try to help them make that project come to life?

A: So the best thing I like to do when a student comes in and says they have a project, I like to ask them. What's their timelines or how long do they have to take this project, how far do they want to go with that project like how creative do they want to be with do they want to make it almost like real size or it was make a small scale model of it, do they want to take. Make this project like multiple days or something that has been done very quickly and then so we kind of hash out the details of what this project entails and how far the student wants to go with the project and then once we figure that out, then we determine what machines are best for those projects so if a student wants to do something that's something that they want to basically get it done by into the week we're going to kind of push in the use of 3D printer or a laser engraver based off of what they're trying to make so that way can be done quickly if there's something that's actually a longter project that they want to take more time and work on. Then we'll kind of open up and say, okay, well, let's see if we could use a CNC or the water jet to kind of make it more. I don't want to say realistic because everything in there is kind of real but more robust and more I guess, extravagant for lack of Red word, and so we'll say we'll give them more time just because those machines require a lot more. in the sense of like you have to design the part in a different software, then transfer the part over to the software that needs to be done on the machine, and then you have to go through the process of setting up the machine, buying the machine, having the material and stuff like that versus like with a 3D printer, if you want to just print like a little, Square or boat or something you can just find the file, get the STL file, put into the software and just start to print. So it really depends on their work project, but that's how we go about it, we assess the timeline of when it needs to be done and what material is required.

Q: What safety protocols are like very common mistakes. Do you see in people who. Are new to all the equipment and robot robot.

A: I mean the most safety concerns that we haven't had any safety incidents so far, not going to look and to keep it that way, but the most safety possible things is just students are going to wear safety glasses or like not tying back their hair or wearing like long sleeve clothing and stuff like that stuff can get caught in machines and those are usually pretty easy to catch just from students just because as the Make space technician my job is to see how things going to be used so I can catch something before it happens, those are the most common one. that we see because a lot of these students haven't been around machines of this size or machines of this caliber before and so it's really hard for them to just like they can see it from the outside there don't be safety glasses if we see it outside but when they're in that room it's just a common thing of like you to put on safety glasses when you do this just to make sure they're safe so that's the most common thing that I can say it happens but usually we're very on top of it and we haven't had any incidents so we want to keep it that way and.

Q: Okay, so whilst probably one of the most coolest projects you've helped to student work.

A: Coolest projects we've helped a student work on. That's a tough one because you've had so many projects and I've only really been here for like two years. I would say the coolest project is probably we have to build a stage, a puppet stage for. It was like a Spanish heritage Mon kind of thing, or actually it might have been for a history project, it was for a history project and these students decided they wanted to build almost like,3 foot four foot stage out of wood and so we got to use the table saw the mire saw and the CNC and kind of working with the Ki of all three machine so it was like a pretty big woodworking project and having them build that and then on top of that having them build like the curtain and having a system to pull the curtain back and forth and then making the machine making the thing stand up on its own so it was a lot of, Detailed work that they got to kind of learn and create and a lot of it was the students doing on their own I was just kind of there just making sure. They did everything incorrectly, but that was probably the coolest project I got to work on just because of how we had to use all the different machines and the kids got trained on all different machines and how it came together and it was a very quickly built project because most times those projects of that size usually take about two degree weeks to do this one took about a week and a half just because they came in and they were pretty good at learning and listening. thinks quickly and stuff like that that's.

Q: How do you handle the troubleshooting when a machine breaks or malfunctions?

A: That's a good question we've had a couple machines break or or we haven't had any malfunction yet but we've had a couple machines break unfortunately when a machine breaks is one of those things where you just kind of tell everyone unfortunately you can't use the machine right now we've gotta wait to fix it the quickest thing is basically I either will order a part to fix it or if you have a part on hand I can fix it we just replace it and the machine will kind of be down just for a day the longest machine was down was probably. The water jet, I think the water jet was down for two months because its one of those machines that you can't just let it sit there for a long time and not work. Which reminds you you probably shouldn't run it right now just to make sure that doesn't happen, but it's one of the machines if you let it sit there for too long, it will kind of, It'll like thebraive will kind of clog up into the line and that's what the braceive was like a sand that you use to cut through the metal and if you let it clog up there's no real easy way to unclog it without having to like almost take the machine apart and so the braceive clogged up and then it kind of backed up into a I don't know exactly the part that I backed up into but basically had to order apart to be repaired and so we found out that it was broken and like, round November, October, and then we called in a technician to come fix it once I wasn't able to fix it. He was supposed to come in in January, but then he got sick. It was to come in and fit around the end of January, but then we have the snow days so that kind of pushed it out even more. And in February, it supposed to come in and then. He came in right before winter break in February and so that machine was down for about three months and a student needed to use it to make a stencil for the band and so unfortunately we had to tell her we can't do it right now, we offered to use the CNC but the CNC hadn't been calibrated to cut metal yet and so. We offered to do it, but she said it wasn't a huge project that they be done and she rather she wanted to use a water jet so it was one of the first projects that we got to do in her watch jet so we kind of wanted to allow her to go through that experience. So yeah, we unfortunately that was as long been down and when those things happened we try to find an alternative like we could use a CNC to cut the middle, but if it's not a time sensitive task, we will kind of just tell the students hey this. Machine is down. You just get to fix it and then can you come back later, but it there's a time since we'll find a different. To makes it.

Q: Okay, these sort of questions are for like someone else like to learn something that can. So what type of skills or certifications have the most useful. I've been a maker basic issue.

A: So skills as a makespace technician, I think a lot of people. Don't realize that you need to kind of also still need to interact with students and teachers and work with them and like that so I would say having good social skills helps with that certifications, just kind of knowing there's not really specifically technical certifications that you need because none these machines require a certifications to run them they just require you to go through the training that most companies will just kind of give you when you purchase the machine so there's no specific certifications or. Skill set that you need, but I would say you want to have a good social skills so you can interact and teach people, especially because. If you know how to use a machine, you want someone else to know how to use it, you need to be able to teach that person how to use it as well so that way they can use it and it's not just you. Always doing the work for someone because you don't want the make to turn into just like a sweat shop or like a workshop where you're just making projects for people and no one's coming in there and learning how to use machines so social skills belong so you can teach people. Basically time management as well, just because you want to be able to manage all the different projects that have to happen so that way no one's project gets kind of put off to the side and doesn't get finished and then also just basically knowing how to manage inventory so you know what you can do and what you can't do so that way you can tell people hey, this project is going to take X amount of days so that way based off of what you have and what's kind of in going on, I guess the proper term is project management. Project managing, so that way you know. How what projects are in the queue what's happening and how to better utilize the space and then also just making sure. You know how to. Interact with all kinds of students because some students are very shy and don't know how to they're not open to learning those things because they're kind of intimidated and other students are just like I think I know everything even though they actually don't and so it's kind of like knowing how to gauge that and read the students and a lot of the best kind of a lot of the cool days is when you have students come in and they're like they're super scared of a machine they don't want to work on it and when you're teaching them how to use it then they realize oh, this is not as bad as I thought it was and then you can kind of see that they're kind of excited. They learned it and so those are a lot of things so like I would just say, you know, it's a lot it's not a. Dead set skill to go by. I would say, just have. I had an knack for wanting to learn how to use machines and learn. How. Things work and how to be willing to build things and have that excitement for that see so it has more of a teacher element Yes it's a little bit more of a teacher element than people realize like I don't teach classes I have a revised elective that I teach but that's not tied to the makerspace and so. It's more of you want to be able to teach people how to use machines so that way they can get the use out of it because like I said, I can just go and use machines all day, I can get like a work log of any X amount of things done for these projects and I can just work in there and do that all day, but that's not what the makerspace is for the makespace is for students to kind of get in there and learn things so part of my job is making sure I can teach students how to use a different machines so that way they can come in there.

Q: So if someone wants to follow your group at, what would you recommend them to?

A: What would you just basically recommend I would say if someone wanted to follow my career path, I would say focus on engineering, it doesn't have to be civil, it doesn't have to be petroleum, it doesn't just focus on an engineering path because at some point in time you will get to learn how to do those things, I didn't go that route but now that I'm in this role. I feel like knowing engineering, having an engineering background, I have engineering experience, not enough to say I have a bachelor's degree in engineering, but I have engineering experience and that really has helped me and if I would have had more of it let's I went to school for mechanical engineering or something like that, I would have, I would have a better, I would be able to help the students better than I current. I to because there are a lot of times when students want to designs of they or build something. My lack of engineering experience or education can't fully help them fulfill their goal or the full potential, but the engineering experience that I have can get them like 60, 70%, even 80% of the way there and that sometimes is good enough because a lot of the kids just need that extra push and they can kind of finish the last 10 to 20 but if they if someone wanted to be aspace makespace technician I would say, Educate engineering pathway is the best way to go so you can learn how to use these machines to the full potential and kind of learn how to. Use them for projects that may or may not people might not know because there a lot of times kids coming up with projects that they want to do and it's always easy to just have them go to a3D printer and just say3D print what you need to print the blah blah blah and go from there but if you have an engineering background you can say okay well you can 3D print this but it'll be a lot cooler if you. With these machines or designed it this kind of way so engineering background for sure and then a little bit of education as well just so you know how to interact with students and how to. act with teachers because a lot of these teachers don't know how to use these machines and it's not like a negative thing it's just a lot of the adults didn't get the luxury of growing up with these machines and learning how to use machines when they went to school so. They don't know how the machines can help. Enhance their classes and things like that. they want to, they want to come in there and learn it, but it's so hard to come in there and say I have this project. But I want to use the megaspace, but I don't know what tools can help. How it can connect it that way so having a little bit of background in education can kind of help you understand how teachers think about projects and how students think about projects so that way you can kind of help students and teachers with their projects in the makerspace and then I guess the last thing would be like. Learning, I guess, well, there's not really a career path in project management, but like learning project management skills just so you can help manage and run a makerspace because it's almost like a business and almost like. A company because you want to make sure everyone's projects get out in time because teachers have deadlines for lesson plans and you don't want to hold anyone up on that and students have deadlines getting grades and projects turned in so't you want to make sure that they can get that stuff done.

Q: Okay, thank you.

A: thank you guys for having me it's been fun and good luck on your podcast thank you you.